.TH ADMIRALCTL 1 "June 2026" "Admiral" "Admiral CLI"
.SH NAME
admiralctl \- command-line interface for the Admiral control plane
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B admiralctl
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fISUBCOMMAND\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B admiralctl
is the official command-line interface for Admiral.
It communicates with
.B admirald
and provides operator workflows for initialization, diagnostics,
node management, application catalog management, instance lifecycle,
backups, routes, operations, users, and storage reporting.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB--server\fR \fIURL\fR
Control plane server endpoint URL.
.TP
\fB--token\fR \fITOKEN\fR
Authentication token (visible in process list; prefer ADMIRAL_ADMIN_TOKEN).
.TP
\fB--ca-cert\fR \fIPATH\fR
CA certificate file for admirald HTTPS validation.
.TP
\fB--operator\fR \fINAME\fR
Operator name for audit logs.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The packaged default configuration is installed at:
.TP
.I /etc/admiralctl/config.yaml
The user configuration normally used by the CLI is:
.TP
.I ~/.config/admiralctl/config.yaml
.SH COMMON COMMANDS
.SS init
Initialize or update local CLI configuration.
.TP
\fB--server\fR \fIURL\fR
admirald API endpoint.
.TP
\fB--token\fR \fITOKEN\fR
Administrative authentication token.
.TP
\fB--ca-cert\fR \fIPATH\fR
CA certificate for TLS verification.
.TP
\fB--generate-signing-key\fR
Generate Ed25519 signing key pair for task verification.
.SS status
Check admirald health.
.TP
\fB--output\fR \fItable|json\fR
Select output format.
.SS nodes
Manage registered worker or portal nodes.
.TP
.B nodes list
List registered nodes. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B nodes show \fINODE_ID\fR
Show details for one node.
.TP
.B nodes register
Register a node.
Requires \fB--id\fR, \fB--hostname\fR, \fB--ip\fR.
Optional: \fB--wireguard-ip\fR, \fB--role\fR, \fB--public-ip\fR, \fB--os\fR, \fB--podman\fR, \fB--token\fR.
.TP
.B nodes enable \fINODE_ID\fR
Enable a node for provisioning. Use \fB--force\fR to skip confirmation.
.TP
.B nodes disable \fINODE_ID\fR
Disable a node. Use \fB--force\fR to skip confirmation.
.TP
.B nodes remove \fINODE_ID\fR
Remove a node. Use
.B --force
to skip confirmation and remove even with active instances.
.TP
.B nodes ready --node \fINODE_ID\fR
Check if a worker node is ready and reachable.
.SS apps
Manage application definitions.
.TP
.B apps list
List registered application definitions. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B apps show \fIAPP_NAME\fR
Show one application definition.
.TP
.B apps apply -f \fIFILE\fR
Create or update an application definition from YAML.
.TP
.B apps validate -f \fIFILE\fR
Validate an application definition locally.
.TP
.B apps activate --name \fINAME\fR
Mark a definition as provisionable.
.TP
.B apps deactivate --name \fINAME\fR
Mark a definition as non-provisionable. Use \fB--force\fR to skip confirmation.
.SS instances
Manage customer application instances.
.TP
.B instances list
List instances. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B instances show \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Show instance details.
.TP
.B instances inspect \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Inspect containers and volumes of a running instance. Use \fB--result\fR to show the last result.
.TP
.B instances provision
Provision a new instance.
Requires \fB--app\fR, \fB--tier\fR, \fB--customer\fR.
Optional: \fB--node\fR, \fB--logical-instance-id\fR, \fB--output\fR, \fB--wait\fR, \fB--quiet\fR.
.TP
.B instances migrate --target-node \fINODE_ID\fR \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Start an offline migration. Optional: \fB--wait\fR.
.TP
.B instances pause|resume|reactivate|start|stop \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Change runtime state of an instance. Optional: \fB--wait\fR, \fB--force\fR.
.TP
.B instances restart \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Restart an instance. Optional: \fB--force\fR.
.TP
.B instances backup --service \fISERVICE\fR \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Trigger a backup for one service. Optional: \fB--wait\fR.
.TP
.B instances deprovision \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Delete an instance. Optional: \fB--wait\fR, \fB--force\fR.
.TP
.B instances destroy \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Alias for deprovision.
.TP
.B instances resize --tier \fITIER_NAME\fR \fIINSTANCE_ID\fR
Change the tier assigned to an instance. Optional: \fB--wait\fR.
.SS operations
Inspect or retry platform operations.
.TP
.B operations list
List operations. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B operations show \fIOPERATION_ID\fR
Show details for a specific operation.
.TP
.B operations retry \fIOPERATION_ID\fR
Retry a failed operation.
.SS backups
List, inspect, and restore backups.
.TP
.B backups list
List backups. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B backups show \fIBACKUP_ID\fR
Show details for a specific backup.
.TP
.B backups restore
Restore a backup.
Requires \fB--backup-id\fR, \fB--instance-id\fR, \fB--service\fR.
Optional: \fB--target-node\fR, \fB--source-type\fR, \fB--source-uri\fR, \fB--verify-checksum\fR.
.TP
.B backups storage get
Show backup storage configuration. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B backups storage set
Update backup storage configuration.
Options: \fB--backend\fR, \fB--endpoint\fR, \fB--region\fR, \fB--bucket\fR, \fB--prefix\fR, \fB--access-key-env\fR, \fB--secret-key-env\fR.
.TP
.B backups storage test
Test storage connectivity.
.TP
.B backups delete \fIBACKUP_ID\fR
Delete a backup.
.TP
.B backups prune
Prune old succeeded backups.
.SS routes
List, inspect, enable, disable, or synchronize public routes.
.TP
.B routes list
List public routes. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B routes show \fIHOSTNAME\fR
Show details for a specific route.
.TP
.B routes sync
Synchronize routes with the control plane.
.TP
.B routes enable \fIHOSTNAME\fR
Enable a public route.
.TP
.B routes disable \fIHOSTNAME\fR
Disable a public route. Optional: \fB--force\fR.
.SS user
Manage administrative users.
.TP
.B user list
List admin users. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B user create \fIUSERNAME\fR
Create a new admin user. Optional: \fB--type\fR.
.TP
.B user set-password \fIUSERNAME\fR
Set a new password for an admin user.
.SS storage
Report storage usage for instances and nodes.
.TP
.B storage instances
Show storage state for instances. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.TP
.B storage nodes
Show storage state for nodes. Supports \fB--output\fR.
.SS version
Print the CLI version.
.SS help
Print general usage information.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/admiralctl/config.yaml
Packaged default configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.config/admiralctl/config.yaml
User configuration.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR admiralctl-admin (8),
.BR admirald (8)
.br
.I admiralctl/docs/man.md
in the source tree for the fuller command reference.
